---
tags: [Notebook/AP Chemistry]
title: 3.1 Intermolecular Forces
created: '2022-11-27T03:39:10.513Z'
modified: '2022-11-27T23:21:17.967Z'
---

# 3.1 Intermolecular Forces
**intermolecular forces (IMFs)** are interactions between *two different* molecules

* IMFs are **Coulombic** - between δ+ and δ- charges
* weaker than intramolecular forces

## Types of IMFs
### Dipole-dipole
**Dipole-dipole interactions** occur between *two polar* molecules.
Molecules orient their dipoles to *maximize attraction*.
* can be attractive or repulsive
* strength directly related to dipole magnitude

### Dipole-induced dipole
**Dipole-induced dipole interactions** occur between *polar and non-polar* molecules.
The polar molecule forces the non-polar molecule to form a dipole; the non-polar molecule is temporarily polarized.
* always attractive
* dipole strength depends on the orientation + proximity of the polar molecule

### London dispersion forces
**London dispresion forces (LDFs)** exist in *all molecules*.
Electrons randomly fluctuate in molecules, creating a temporary dipole when unbalanced. This dipole interacts with another molecule, polarizing it. The temporarily polar molecules attract.
* only IMF between non-polar molecules
* strength related to ease of electron dispersion
  * atom sizes, molecular surface area

### Hydrogen bonding
**Hydrogen bonding** occurs between *hydrogen* covalently bonded to an element with high electronegativity (N, O, F) and *another atom of high electronegativity*.
The bonded highly-electronegative atom strongly attracts e<sup>-</sup> away from hydrogen. H partially loses e<sup>-</sup>, leaving a "bare" proton w/ positive charge. The H<sup>+</sup> is attracted to the highly-electronegative atom on the other molecule.
* unusually strong dipole-dipole interaction
* not a true "bond"
* hydrogen bonding within a molecule is possible

### Ion-dipole
**Ion-dipole interactions** occur in aqueous ionic compounds.
The dipole of H<sub>2</sub>O interacts with the ionic compound, causing it to separate. The H<sub>2</sub>O dipole interacts with the charged ions.
* stronger than hydrogen bonding

## Properties
